---
title:  "New Year, Newly Employed: Getting Your First Job"
date:   2020-01-02 20:00:00 -0700
---

Happy New Year everybody! It's pretty surreal writing 2020. Feels like
the future. And what better time than the future to talk about new
beginnings&mdash;specifically getting your first CS job.

More than classes, more than side projects and clubs, I'd say that
getting your first CS job is the most important task you should
accomplish as a CS student. Your first job is what will give you the
necessary skills to do whatever you want, whether that's leapfrogging
up to the big tech companies, starting your own company, or simply
learning how to program in a professional environment.

At the same time, getting your first job isn't easy. You need to
somehow have a resume when you have little to no experience. Every
company seems like they require 2-3 years of experience and React,
Redux, Tree-Monkey-Frog.js plus 10 years of Swift. Not to mention the
*wonderful* technical interviews you might face. Let's figure out how
we can surmount these problems.

# Where Should I Apply?

In one word: EVERYWHERE. A job says 2-3 years experience? Why not? The
job listing says Software Developer and not intern? Go for it! Maybe
they can open up an intern position. You don't know the stack? You can
learn it! Just apply!

There's some caveats, of course. Try to avoid what I call
non-technical technical jobs, jobs such as "Solutions Engineer" or
"Product Analyst". These are perfectly good jobs, but if you're
looking for a technical position, these are not it.

Avoid unpaid jobs. Even as a novice you should be paid. A lot of
companies, ranging from pre-seed startups (aka "bro I have this idea")
to full on companies advertise "intern" positions that are really
unpaid junior developers. These are the worst of both worlds since
you're expected to build stuff instead of learning and you don't get
paid. There are some very very rare unpaid internships that genuinely
emphasize learning instead of productivity, but they're few and far
between.

You can certainly apply to the large tech companies such as Google,
Facebook, etc. I have an [article on precisely
that](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/11/14/get-that-big-n-job.html). But
unless you have some work experience or outstanding projects, you
probably won't get a response. I'm a little hesitant to
recommend that you take a large tech company as your first job. It's a
lot of pressure for a first job, dealing with the complex politics and
internal technology of large companies. Nonetheless, if you want to,
go for it.

Definitely apply to local companies. Not only will it make the
application process and logistics of working there a lot easier, but
they might have an established relationship with NYU. I like using
[Built In NYC](https://www.builtinnyc.com/) and
[AngelList](https://angel.co/). You can go to meetups and see if
companies advertise there too.

Startups are another decent option for first jobs. However beware of
startups that are just getting started (if you hear "MVP" or "pre-seed"
or "getting off the ground", run) and trying to use you as cheap
labor. Remember, do not take unpaid jobs. [Hacker
News](https://news.ycombinator.com/jobs) and [Work at a
Startup](https://www.workatastartup.com/) are good resources for
finding startup jobs.

## Use Your Network

One important resource you **must** use is your network. Some people
have better networks than others, but barring extreme cases, everybody
has some form of network. This may be family, this may be professors
who took a shine to you. It could even be people you randomly met in
class or at a meetup.

The key idea here is to be utterly shameless. Ask everybody you know
if they have some connections they're willing to use. Even if you've
barely met the person. Even if you're not sure they like you. Even if
the person is not technical themselves. The worst that can happen is
they say no, or something vaguely unpleasant. But that's their
problem, not yours.

A good corollary is to always try to grow your network. This means
meeting people and keeping in contact. You can meet people at pretty
much any social event. Sure, tech events like meetups and conferences
work, but also weddings, funerals, bat/bar mitzvahs, family reunions,
parties, etc. You can keep in contact via LinkedIn, email, Facebook,
GitHub, WeChat, WhatsApp, and so on. You never know who will get you
your next job.

When using your network, try to avoid pressuring the person you're
asking. Emphasize that they should only help you if that is their
wish.


# When Should I Apply?

NOW! If you're in high school, great! Apply and you'll be an
incredible dev by the time you're in college. If you're a freshman in
college? Apply! Sophomore? Apply! A 30-something just out of a
bootcamp? No better time than the present!

For some reason people tend to self sabotage, especially if they're
getting started a little late. They worry that they're not good enough
or they tell themselves that they'll apply once they get past some
checkpoint. Don't do that. Apply first, ask questions later.

# Resume?

Resumes are tricky if you don't have anything to put on them. I joke
that I'm slowly stripping out the BS from my resume, but it's
true. Don't be afraid to pad up your resume. I've put stuff like
extracurriculars such as sports and dumb school projects on
there. There's always a chance the person who reviews your resume also
played lacrosse in college or was a member of Model UN. Plus it's
better than whitespace. As you get more experience the fluff will get
stripped and replaced with cold, hard experience.

If you have a bunch of blank space on your resume, go start some [side
projects](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/12/21/side-projects.html)!
Spend a weekend or two working on one and put it on your resume. They
don't have to be extremely advanced to go on your resume.

You can get your resume reviewed in [HH Websites and
Resumes](https://www.facebook.com/groups/1487708811477672/), as well
as /r/cscareerquestions (just ignore all the big N obsessed comments).

Classic resume advice stands of course. Keep it to a page; proofread
your writing; make sure the font is legible. Joel Spolsky has a [good
post](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2004/01/26/getting-your-resume-read/)
on this.

# Interviews

Companies will generally have some sort of interview. This will be
technical, though maybe not the usual Big N format of solving a
programming problem. I've had interviews that were more casual, where
we talked about my projects or went through a system design
problem.

System design basically means you get asked about a potential
application, say a chat app, then you get asked about how you'd solve
a particular problem within said app. Often this involves the various
objects/data structures within the app, or maybe using a certain
paradigm.

You could in theory do a whole bunch of leetcode or read a whole bunch
of stuff on system design, but I wouldn't worry too much. You'll have
plenty of time to study leetcode if or when you're trying for your
second company. Besides, the company should know that you're a student
with no prior experience. If they expect you to pump out leetcode
solutions, that's too much man.

That being said, you might want to work on the behavioral aspects of
the interview. After all, that's all they have to assess you,
really. Dress well. Not necessarily fancy, but in clothes that fit and
are clean. Learn to smile and make small talk (not the
language!). Figure out how to phrase stuff in a positive manner,
whether it's your boring summer job from a year ago or your greatest
weakness.

If you want, ask a few questions at the end. I like going through an
ad hoc [Joel
Test](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2000/08/09/the-joel-test-12-steps-to-better-code/)
with them. Or ask them about their code review process. If they hem
and haw or outright say they don't have one, that's a bad sign. A good
question to ask is how they plan on providing mentorship. Will you
have an assigned mentor? How much time will you spend writing code
versus learning? Would they ever be fine with you reading up on, say,
docker versus doing your work? Have they had interns before?

Ask a couple questions about your actual work. What stack will you be
using? Will you be writing new code or fixing bugs? How much legacy?

# Goal of the Internship

If you want something to home in on with your questions, I'd try to
figure out what the company views as the goal of the internship. This
varies from company to company.

Some companies view interns as basically junior developers they can
pay less. They won't care at all about mentoring you. They'll just
care that you're writing code, stat. Other companies genuinely see
internships as a mentoring process, through which maaaybe you can be
productive. Other companies may see it as a test of sorts before a
full time offer.

It's really important to iron this out before you accept an offer and
before you start working. Internship can mean a lot of very different
roles.

# After You Get the Offer

First, beware the [exploding
offer](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2008/11/26/exploding-offer-season/). It's
a terrible practice in which a company will give you an incredibly
short deadline to decide. I've had it happen to me. The important
thing to remember is that hiring is a pain, while giving someone an
extension of a couple days is a lot easier. Not to mention an
exploding offer is generally a sign that the company is a little
manipulative. Not a total red flag, but not a great sign either.

Once you have the offer, it's good to be a little more picky. Read
about the company on GlassDoor. Think about how you interacted with
your interviewers and whether you liked them. Did they interview you
well? Were they nice? Will you be working in a stack that's
interesting to you and helpful for your future career plans? If it's
legacy Java or PHP, maybe not. Or worse, some form of domain specific
language or proprietary software only used by a few places.

At the same time, don't worry too much about picking the best
company. Entry level programming jobs are extremely low commitment. If
you don't like it and don't need the cash, quitting is easy. If you do
need the cash, even a shitty programming job is far cushier than a
sales job or whatever job you can scrounge as a student.

It's somewhat inevitable that you'll get stuck with a mediocre if not
shitty job sometime in your life. Why not now?

Of course if anybody is discriminatory, abusive or physically
threatening, you should not take the job or leave the job
immediately. And ideally name and shame so that others avoid the
company.

# On the Job

Once you have the job, do your best, work hard and have fun. Try to
find people who you can learn from, but verify what they say. Just
because someone has been programming longer than you doesn't mean
they're that good at it.

Oh and make sure your taxes come out to the right number. HR screws
this up surprisingly frequently.
