---
title:  "Intellectual Ambition"
date:   2020-12-10 10:00:00 -0700
---


I mentioned in [my why not NYU CS
post](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/11/12/goto-nyu-cs-considered-harmful.html)
that I haven't been impressed with NYU's CS majors. I'd like to expand
on this. I don't want my conclusion to be simply that NYU CS majors
are subpar.

In many fields, there is a concept of root cause analysis. Root cause
analysis attempts to find the original sources of the problem. Often
times these sources are not obvious and obscured by blanket causes
like "human error". For instance, if a plane crashes due to human
error in filling the fuel, the root cause is not the human error, but
that there was no system to guard against fueling the
plane incorrectly.

Let's apply root cause analysis to crisis of quality in NYU CS. Why
are NYU CS students not living up to my hopes?

# Admissions

What I assumed when I enrolled at NYU was that the really good people
were going to places like MIT, Berkeley, etc. Poor NYU wasn't high
enough in the rankings and was just getting everybody else.

A few things dissuaded me from that. For one, I met people from
schools ranked lower than NYU. Schools like Indiana University,
Northeastern, RPI, etc. If they were from schools ranked lower than
NYU, presumably they'd be worse, right? Nope. These students were
doing really cool stuff. They were working at top companies, doing
programming languages research, taking hard courses, etc.

Of course there's selection bias here. I met these people at
conferences and internships. I'm not meeting the mediocre students from
IU/NEU/RPI.

Still, even if these were the top of the top students, they were at
schools lower ranked than NYU. And at NYU they'd also be top of the
top.

Not to mention, NYU isn't that low ranked. It's pretty highly ranked
overall and its admission rate has been dropping super rapidly. If you
tell someone you go to NYU, generally they'll make some compliment
about your intelligence.

So what gives? I don't have fully satisfactory answers, but here's a
couple conjectures.

First, most top CS students have probably been programming in high
school and know that they want to be a programmer. Since NYU isn't
known as a good CS school, good programmers are much more likely to
end up at places like RPI, UMich, Waterloo and so on. I know that
barring a few important extraordinary factors, I probably wouldn't be
at NYU. Almost every one of the top CS students at NYU that I know had
similar extraordinary factors.

Second, NYU isn't an automatic pick. Some schools, often state ones,
are automatic picks for high schoolers. If you're a good programmer,
you have decent but not stellar grades in high school, and you live in
Texas, where are you gonna apply? UT Austin!  Indiana? IU! Washington?
UW! You see the pattern? Because NYU is a private school and in a
state with stellar public schools, we aren't anybody's automatic pick.

Third, NYU is expensive. We're really really expensive. CS majors tend
to be numbers people. $70,000 is a very large number. Not to mention,
CS majors from Stanford as well as from community colleges manage to
make it into Google. Why pay $70,000 a year to end up in the same
place as the kid who went to Stony Brook?

# Intellectual Ambition

I was going to write an entire post on this, but honestly it'd
probably be too bitter and jaded. I'll try to keep that at a minimum.

There's a thread here that underpins my complaints about NYU CS. At
one point I asked a few professors about why there were no honors
classes for CS. They responded that there used to be honors
classes---indeed some sections of courses are still unofficial honors
courses---but that they had to remove the designation because nobody
would take them.

If I had to give out a prize for most disappointing sentence in my
time at NYU, that'd be up there.

But actually it wasn't that disappointing, because I already knew that
was the deal. Students at NYU lack what I'd call intellectual
ambition. They're plenty ambitious in other ways. They'll talk your
ear off about getting an internship or getting a 4.0. But when it
comes to learning CS topics on their own, the spark isn't there.

Yes yes, this is all subjective to my experience. It's certainly
possible that there are plenty of students who are quietly working on
side projects who I don't know about.

That said, there's some indications. For one, the lack of Albert
replacements. Albert is a horendous piece of software. It's utterly
terrible and displays a level of malice towards the user that's almost
impressive. Anybody who interacts with Albert has at one point tossed
around the idea of building a replacement. I know I have. And yet,
there's only a handful of attempts. As far as I know, Schedge is the
only deployed, fully realized Albert replacement[^1]

[^1]: It's not a full replacement but still, it's pretty far.

If there was truly a bunch of talented programmers at NYU, we'd have
an Albert replacement by now.

How can you tell if someone is intellectually ambitious? For me, it's
an unmistakable feeling when I talk to them that I need to up my own
game. I'll start talking to them and feel like a fire has been lit
underneath me. They'll be talking about their cool project or this
neat paper they read and the only thought in my head is "dammit I need
to get to their level".

Another sign is that they don't let school get in the way of their
education. They'll be procrastinating their OS homework by writing a
compiler. They'll kill time by learning this new web framework.

I've mentored a few groups of people and a common thread is that the
mentorship will break down because everybody's too busy with studying
and classes. Which yes, is the right set of priorities for
students. You should put your classes ahead of your extracurriculars.

But when I say that, when I'm nodding to some explanation about how
they can't make next week's meeting because they have midterms, I
can't help but feel like a coach who's repeating the stock line of
school first, sports second, all the while screaming in his head,
dammit, this isn't how you get good. Yes, you should put your grades
first. Yes, you should go study for that midterm. But dammit, this
isn't how you get good at programming.

Why the lack of intellectual ambition? I'm not sure on this either. I
do have a theory. Extrapolating from the admissions reasons, the type
of student that gets accepted to NYU is ambitious, but did not focus
on CS in high school. They're not someone who just picked a default
school, so they care about academics and prestige. This is a tricky
demographic, as this student cares about grades and classes but
they're not in love with programming. Perhaps they'll work on a
project or attend a club meeting, but they're fundamentally focused on
the game that got them into college and has brought them the most
success: school.

Side note, these traits explain a lot of the academic participation
trophy posts like the [Case Against Double
Majors](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/05/15/the-case-against-double-majors.html),
[Masters Degrees: Are They Worth
It?](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/04/01/is-masters-worth-it.html),
and [Use Your
Runway](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/10/07/use-your-runway.html).

I'm aware that these generalizations are too harsh. Unfortunately when
you take traits from a large group of people, you end up distilling
the negative quite potently. Remember that these traits are embedded
in a far more complicated person, with nuances from their family,
background, education, etc.

# Cultivating Intellectual Ambition

Okay, complaining over. If you've been reading carefully, you'll
notice that I have a strategy on this blog of taking a negative
complaint of mine and turning it into a positive piece of
advice. Let's do this for intellectual ambition. How can you be a more
intellectually ambitious student?

A lot of my posts have essentially been guides towards this end. Do
projects, double check if you like CS, read sources about CS, learn
the humanities, etc. But in short, you should find some area you like
and you should keep learning it. You should make it your goal to get
really good at this field. Not good enough to get a job. Not good
enough to get an A. The goal is the knowledge and the ability that
comes from the learning.

It's like learning to play a sport or an instrument[^2]. There's a joy
in seeing yourself get better and more skilled. And yes, there's some
fun in surpassing others. Learning can be a competition!

[^2]: Ironically two activites co-opted by the college industrial
    complex.

The next part of becoming an intellectually ambitious person is to
stop caring so much about school. This may seem
counterintuitive. School is where learning happens, right? This is
true, but school is also a gigantic leech of intellectual ambition.

It's too easy when you're in school to not learn some topic because it
wasn't taught, or to wait until your professor teaches something to
learn it. Have you ever realized that you can just read ahead in your
textbook? I don't know if this is just me, but it took a shameful
amount of time for me to realize, hey, I like this subject. Maybe I
should just read about it on my free time? I don't need a teacher to
learn it.

Why is that? Well every student realizes at some time that school
isn't about learning. School is about optimizing points.

What's essential is that you switch from aiming to get good grades,
with learning as a side effect, to learning as your main focus, with
getting good grades as a side effect.

I got significantly better at programming when I stopped feeling
guilty about procrastinating my classes by writing code. And y'know
what? I still got good grades in my CS classes, because all of that
coding developed my problem solving and technical skills.

Even if you do get bad grades, will it even matter? Jobs don't
particularly care about your grades. I've gotten more jobs from the
niche, domain specific knowledge I gained while procrastinating Theory
of Computation than I've gotten from my GPA. Maybe graduate schools
will, but they'll also love it if you spend your free time diving deep
into your potential area of research.

The other reason to not care about courses is that frankly, courses
are table stakes. NYU doesn't require that many courses in the first
place. I could have completed the CS major in two years. That's pretty
ridiculous. Courses like Algorithms and Operating Systems are not the
pinnacle of a CS major. They're the basic, standard knowledge that
every CS graduate should know.

You should aim to go into these courses already having taught yourself
a significant portion of the material. Obviously that's not always
possible, but at least consider it as a goal.

If you don't believe me, look at schools like Cornell or UMich. They
have far more requirements.

Unfortunately NYU CS needs to allow CS majors who decided to take
Intro to Programming as second semester freshman the opportunity to
graduate in 4 years. Go hang out by Romeo or Leeann's office sometime
around course selection time. You'll be shocked at the number of
seniors with four, five unfulfilled requirements.

I don't know why NYU insists on pushing these graduates over the
fence. Well, I do know. It's a classic funding issue. More students
equals more funding for CS. But that's a little absurd these days
since the department have more CS students than ever. They can afford
to drop a few.

But anyways, NYU's unlikely to change their requirements anytime
soon. Therefore if you truly wish to be a good programmer, if you wish
to improve NYU CS, if you want to accomplish great things with your
programming skills, you should aim to be intellectually ambitious.

# Et Tu

I'm sorry if this post hurt your feelings or insulted you. Truly, I'm
sorry. I want to emphasize that these issues aren't the failings of
individual students, but the failings of a larger entity. NYU CS just
isn't a community that encourages intellectual ambition.

A lot of the CS professors at NYU are disconnected from the
undergraduate community. Part of that may be because the professors
wish to focus on research. But part of that is because it's really
disappointing and really hard to teach and train students who aren't
intellectually ambitious.

Let me be clear. I'm not *that* intellectually ambitious. Compared to
a tenured professor at NYU, I'm significantly less devoted to computer
science. But I still find it heartbreaking to spend so much time
working with students only for them to vehemently resist learning on
their own, or for them to stop attending meetings because of
midterms. Professors at Courant block themselves off from undergrads
because there's only so much disappointment one can take.

Maybe someday this will change. Maybe the next generation of NYU CS
students will be intellectually ambitious. Maybe they'll ignore their
Algorithms homework because they're too busy reading about dependent
types. Maybe they'll debate professors about distributed systems in
their free time.

One can hope.
