---
title:  "Résumé Review"
date:   2020-08-01 00:00:00 -0300
---

Your résumé probably needs work. I've looked at a decent amount of
résumés and it's quite rare that I find an organized, well designed
one. Here's some tips on how to make your résumé clear, concise and
aesthetically pleasing.

# Typography

A résumé is the most essential typographical exercise you'll face. You
have a document will be read by a multitude of different people, the
majority of whom will only glance at it for a few seconds. It is
absolutely crucial that your résumé is legible, conveys the parts you
deem important, and looks nice.

I'm no expert in typography. My knowledge of types is more in the
implementing a typechecker area. However I do know the basics, thanks
to [Butterick’s Practical
Typography](https://practicaltypography.com/). You should read the
entire book, but I'd settle for skimming the section on
[résumés](https://practicaltypography.com/résumés.html) and [font
recommendations](https://practicaltypography.com/font-recommendations.html).

I use Butterick's recommendations throughout my résumé. I try to keep
healthy margins, I avoid too much text density, I limit my use of bold
and italics. Instead of bold for headers, I use [small
caps](https://practicaltypography.com/small-caps.html).

Definitely read Practical Typography and apply it to your résumé and
basically any text you create.

All of the following advice is in Practical Typography, but I figure
some of you won't read it.

## Bold or Italics

I see way too much italics and bold in people's résumés. I kind of
understand why; they're both meant to emphasize something in text and
in a résumé people want a lot of different aspects to be emphasized. I
try to think of bold and italics slightly differently. Bold and
italics are there to emphasize text *inside* a body of text. Notice
how the world inside is visually distinct from the other words around
it? If I removed the italics, it would not be distinct. That's where
bold and italics shine.

However many times people italicize or bold something that is already
visually distinct, whether that's via text size or position.

Take this job entry:

<span style="padding-right: 30px; font-style: italic"> 8/19 &#8211; 1/20 </span> <b> Foo Corp </b> <u> Software Development Intern </u>
<div style="padding-left: 123px; padding-bottom: 50px"> Designed foobar dashboard with React and Lean. Interfaced with backend
team on API design. </div>


Visually this is pretty confusing. The date range doesn't need to be
italicized since it's already positioned apart from everything
else. Likewise the job title doesn't need to be underlined since the
bolded company name already sets it apart.

<span style="padding-right: 30px"> 8/19 &#8211; 1/20 </span> <b> Foo Corp </b> Software Development Intern
<div style="padding-left: 123px; padding-bottom: 50px"> Designed foobar dashboard with React and Lean. Interfaced with backend
team on API design. </div>

This looks a lot cleaner.

Never combine bold, italics or underline in the same line.

## Margins

Keep your margins wide! Don't use those skimpy half-inch margins
because you felt the need to cram one more hackathon projects into
your résumé. Typography, as in all art, is about negative space. Use
it wisely.

Top and bottom as well. Nobody likes text that is mere millimeters
away from the bottom of the page.

## Font Size

Keep it nice and large. People are reading your résumé, not
ants. Especially if the person reading is older, they'll appreciate
large, legible text.

## Font Choice

Use a decent font. Please don't use Times New Roman. I know, I know,
your teacher told you to use Times New Roman. The same teacher who
hasn't applied to a job in 10 years and certainly not to a tech
company. I use [Charter](https://practicaltypography.com/charter.html)
in my résumé.

# One Clean Page

Keep your résumé simple. Often times people feel the need to cram
everything on their résumé, as if that makes them more
impressive. Don't. Prioritize readability over the number of
extracurricular activities you can stuff into your résumé. I'm not
afraid to cut old jobs or old projects. For an item to remain on my
résumé, it not only must be impressive, it must be more impressive and
more interesting than the other entries. It's actually nice when I
remove an impressive entry; it means I'm getting better.

There is a time and a place for multiple page résumés. If you have 5
or more years of work experience, or if you're actually writing a
curriculum vitae, aka CV, then sure, multiple pages is fine. But if
you're a college student in the US, 1 page is it.

Trim your descriptions carefully. I don't even use bullets actually. I
just have a short sentence or two underneath the description.


# Omit Omit Omit

Don't put your address. Nobody needs to know your address. Don't put
your phone number. They'll ask you if they need your phone number.

Unless your high school is particularly famous, don't put it.

Don't put a statement of purpose or a summary or an intro. They're
always awkward and unnecessary.

# Copy That

Make sure your copy, i.e. your writing, is immaculate. Check your
spelling, your grammar, your phrasing. Read it out loud if you
must. If your English abilities are not particularly strong, get
someone who does have strong English abilities to edit your résumé.

Try to tighten up any sentence. It's okay to use some fragments here
and there.

Make sure your tenses are in check. I'm not a huge fan of the weird
present-imperative that some people use like "Develop iOS app for
business loans", but if you must, make it consistent. I prefer a
consistent past indicative, but that's just me.

Capitalize names properly dammit. It's JavaScript not Javascript,
GitHub not Github or github[^1]. You write Python not python.

[^1]: Although this does have a nice old school Unix vibe

# Keep Neutral

Try to keep a neutral tone in your writing. Don't attempt to
self-aggrandize in your descriptions. Your project is not "impressive"
or "fascinating". You did not work with an "excellent" team. All that
this does is make you seem desperate or egotistical.

# But Not Boring

That isn't to say your résumé should be completely devoid of life. If
you have the room, feel free to add a sport or hobby if it represents
a significant portion of your life. There's always the chance this
small addition amuses the person who reads your résumé.

# It Just Needs To Be Readable

A résumé is ultimately a very utilitarian document. It's a record of
your accomplishments for someone to read and use to assess you. All
that you need to do is write a résumé that is legible and that
highlights the important, impressive info. That's not rocket science.

And yet so many people fail at this goal. I see an absurd quantity of
résumés sans sensible margins, sans legible text size and sans
serif[^2].

[^2]: Sorry I couldn't resist

Imagine your résumé as a speech that introduces yourself as a job
candidate. Would you speak faster and without pause, just to cram more
information into your speech? No, because you'd end up confusing the
listener. Then why cram so much onto the poor one page?

The unfortunate truth is that you can't control how impressive you
appear. You can't control if the reader thinks your projects are
nonsense. All that you can do is make the résumé readable and hope for
the best.
