---
title:  "Hit Retry"
date:   2020-08-05 20:00:00 -0700
---

I do this fun exercise where I contrast how I learn for fun versus how
I learn in school. One big difference is in having to take multiple
tries to learn something.

There have been quite a few topics where it took me a couple tries to
learn them properly. Monads took me a few iterations. I had to read
about them, use them, then read about them some more, and finally
wrap[^1] my head around them. Same with client-server
architectures. Programming itself took a few tries! I tried to learn
C, then NetLogo, then some Objective-C, then a little
JavaScript/Python. Only in my high school's intro to programming class
did it finally stick. With Racket of all languages. Go figure.

[^1]: Like a burrito!

In school, retrying is hard. If you fail a course and have to take it
again, that's a huge negative. Why is that? In our education system we
happen to value forward movement; students cannot be [left
behind](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/No_Child_Left_Behind_Act). Therefore
only the students who blatantly do not know the subject, who do not
submit the work, who do not come close to passing the test, only they
will have to repeat the class. Everybody else gets passed, albeit
sometimes with a C or D.

When I think back on my courses, there's definitely some that I should
not have passed. I didn't know the material; I didn't properly grasp
the ideas; I didn't get it. But since repeating a class is a travesty,
I was allowed to pass. Sometimes with quite good grades!

Of course there's a financial aspect to this problem. Failing students
is directly correlated to them losing money. If not in more tuition,
then in delaying their entry to the workforce. There's a financial
aspect as well to the school. Students who have to repeat courses tend
to get discouraged and might drop out.

I don't have a solution to this problem. Some schools go ahead and
fail students. UChicago, Cornell, etc. are famous for their trial by
fire classes. Often times this is combined with a "dropdown major",
basically a major that one can switch to that is easier. These aren't
officially designated, but they're well known among students.

Maybe the answer is to keep things the same. There's nothing
necessarily wrong with students coming out of college not knowing
certain subjects. It's okay if some CS students don't understand
Operating Systems. It's fine if some math majors don't have a great
grasp of Galois theory.

I know some will respond that students should just study harder. But
there's a fundamental time limit to a course and some knowledge takes
longer than a semester to seep in.

We can imagine school as a video game where we progress from level to
level. Sometimes the level gets the best of us and we have to try
again. We have to hit the retry button and start at the beginning. It
bothers me that we punish this act of retrying. We should be
encouraging students to try again, to admit that they didn't get a
topic the first time around, to hit retry.

Anything worth learning is worth learning twice.
