---
title:  "Grades Don't Matter"
date:   2021-03-13 10:00:00 -0700
---

Grades don't matter. I've beaten around this bush before in my [prior
NYU CS
rants](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/12/10/intellectual-ambition.html)
by saying that students are overly obsessed with school, that they
should care less about grades. Lemme go the whole way. Grades do not
matter. More specifically, they don't matter in two ways:

# Way 1: You Want A PhD

Do you want a PhD? I.e. do you plan on spending 4-6 years on a
singular research project? Do you plan on going into academia or a
research career?

When I ask my fellow students this question, they usually give a
non-committal "well maybe". This means **no** 99% of the time. Grad
school is not something that you can just waltz into. If you seriously
plan on applying to a PhD, you should have a plan of attack involving
research experience, talking to professors and finding areas of
interest. There's a whole host of [great
grad](http://csrankings.org/advice.html) [school
advice](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~harchol/gradschooltalk.pdf) out there.

For some reason, a lot of students view grad school as just another
accolade to get. Good high school students go to good colleges; good
college students go to good grad schools. Remove that notion from your
head. Graduate school is like law school or medical school. Would you
go to medical school just cause you did really well in college and
wanted to learn more? No! You go because you want to be a
doctor. Unless you want to be a researcher, do not go to grad school.

If you're on the fence, and I mean truly on the fence, then follow
Philip Guo's
[advice](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hOSl3xPmHiQ&feature=emb_logo). Go
to [CSRankings.org](http://csrankings.org/), select a subfield you
might be interested in, and see which schools are highly ranked in
that area. Click on a few professors and check out their
research. Does this research sound interesting to you? Can you stand
to read a few paragraphs[^1] of a research paper? Great! Maybe you
should talk to your professors about grad school.

[^1]: Research papers are pretty hard to read and require a lot of
    knowledge. It's totally fine if you can't finish a paper or
    understand more than a few paragraphs.

However, I will make the case that if you do want a PhD, you shouldn't
care about grades. This doesn't mean you should get bad grades. A
decent CS GPA does factor into your admissions. But as outlined in the
wonderful [Applying to PhD Programs in Computer
Science](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~harchol/gradschooltalk.pdf) guide, it
doesn't matter that much:

> When applying to a Ph.D. program in CS, you’d like your grades in CS
and Math and Engineering classes to be about 3.5 out of 4.0, as a
rough guideline.  It does not help you, in my opinion, to be closer to
4.0 as opposed to 3.5.  It’s a much better idea to spend your time on
research than on optimizing your GPA. At CMU the mean GPA of students
admitted is over 3.8 (even though we don’t use grades as a criterion),
however students have also been admitted with GPAs below 3.3, since
research is what matters, not grades. A GPA of 4.0 alone with no
research experience will not get you into any top CS program.  Keep in
mind that GPAs are evaluated in the context of the undergraduate
program.  A 3.4 GPA from a top-ranked CS undergraduate program like
CMU counts the same as a 3.8 or 3.9 GPA from a less well-known CS
undergraduate program

"But Nick!", you exclaim, "I should care about grades then! I need to
get at least a 3.5 GPA." Sure, but I said you shouldn't care about
grades, not that you should get bad grades. If you're planning on
going to grad school, you should like computer science. Computer
science should be a hobby of yours. You should enjoy going to class or
reading the textbook or talking to professors. Yes, there may be a
course or two that stretches your interest; I didn't exactly enjoy
Theory of Computation. But it should still be easy to get decent
grades in computer science without caring too much.

And in the areas that you really enjoy, that you might even consider
as a PhD subject, it shouldn't be close. You should enjoy the material
enough that you happily read ahead, that you bug your professor, that
you could practically teach the course yourself.

As I've already explained in the Intellectual Ambition post, the
causality relation here should be that genuine interest implies good
grades. Not the other way around.

# Way 2: You Don't Want A PhD

If you do not want a PhD, then grades are worth little to
nothing. **Passing** is worth something, certainly. A CS degree is
worth something. But your GPA? Not worth much at all. Oh sure, grades
might help get you that first internship or job. Y'know what also
would help?
[Projects](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/12/21/side-projects.html),
networking, [cold
emails](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/12/19/sent-from-my-iphone.html),
etc. If I had to bet on what would give a better return on investment,
I'd certainly say projects. Companies care a lot more about whether
you can write and deploy code versus your grade in algorithms.

There are an elite few places that care about grades, such as hedge
funds and other financial institutions. However, they too put a lot of
emphasis on prior work experience and technical ability. I suppose
some effort put into grades would be worthwhile in that case, but the
grades are still meaningless unless you have work experience. Truth be
told, it's probably not your grades that prevent you from getting that
Jane Street internship.

You may notice that I'm omitting masters. That's cause you probably
[do not need to get a
masters](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/04/01/is-masters-worth-it.html).

# Please Care

Does this mean you should slack off in courses and do the bare minimum
and not learn anything? God no. Seriously, please don't do that. You
should keep learning, but approach it as a genuine interest. The
problem I see with so many NYU students is that they focus too much on
the grades and not on the learning.

If you're a CS major, I'd hope that you like CS. If that is the case,
then you should learn because you enjoy it, and coincidentally get
decent grades. If you don't like CS, well grades can be a decent
indicator of whether you're putting in enough work, but they're not a
sufficient indicator of whether you'll be an employable CS
graduate. Either way, you shouldn't use grades as your metric
for success. I suppose that's a more accurate way of phrasing this
post, but hey, it isn't as eyecatching.
