---
title:  "One NYU CS"
date:   2021-12-22 10:00:00 -0700
---

NYU should merge its CS departments into one department. By keeping
the two departments, NYU is diluting every single aspect of NYU
Computer Science. Everything from courses to clubs to recruiting will
improve if we merge the two departments.

I've talked about [course and professor
allocation](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/12/08/waitlisted-professor-allocation.html)
before. Right now Courant CS has too many students, not enough
professors and as a result, absurdly long waitlists. With one CS
department, we can potentially alleviate some of this pressure. Core
CS classes such as data structures can be taught in large scale
lectures while niche courses such as compilers can have a single
section for both schools. Sure, it won't solve all the issues, but
it'll help.

Recruiting is another classic issue. From my anecdotal experience,
Tandon appears to have a respectably strong recruiting scene. They
hold a solid career fair and seem to have a good reputation in
industry. By merging the CS departments, we can capitalize on that
reputation. NYU could also centralize its career programs for CS and
potentially hire someone to help students get jobs.

I've complained about the quality of Courant CS students
before. There's not a lot we can change about this in the
short-term. But if we merge the departments, perhaps this will give an
opportunity for the top students in Tandon to interact with the top
students in CAS. I know that I've met some impressive students in
Tandon. If NYU CS was a unified program, if CS clubs were just NYU CS
clubs and not Tandon CS clubs vs CAS CS Clubs, we'd have a lot larger
and a lot richer of a community.

Where should this department be located? Simple: Brooklyn. Depending
on your affiliation and home borough, you either reacted in absolute
horror or joy. I'll admit that for the longest time I was not
enamoured at the idea of NYU CS moving to Brooklyn. It felt like a
downgrade or an exile.

What changed? I visited the new Tandon math department. And guys, it's
beautiful. It's in 2 Metrotech Center, a really nice building with
sunlight, high ceilings and modern furniture. It felt like an
engineering building in a modern, well funded, top tier school. I
highly recommend going there and checking it out. Compared to Courant
with its grim, beige banality, I'd take it in a heartbeat.

I knew NYU was investing a lot of money into Tandon, but I didn't
appreciate the extent until now. It takes a lot for me to praise NYU,
however truly, NYU seems to be doing a great job in revitalizing
Tandon.

Not to mention, there's something sensible about locating your CS
department near the engineering school. Students will be a few minutes
away from the MakerSpace, from HackNYU, from the most exciting new
developments in NYU.

And finally, this merger will allow Courant CS to crawl out from under
the influence of math. Courant CS has been beholden to math for too
long. The department has skewed extremely mathematical, to the point
where a lot of its members could be called computation/applied
mathematicians. That's great from an academic perspective, but it also
means there's a severe lack of professors who code on a continual
basis, which in turn means a lack of professors who can teach
undergraduate coding-heavy courses effectively. It also means the
professors who end up in charge of the department and the curriculum
may not have the necessary experience to best run a CS program. Yes,
yes, CS is not programming, but it just so happens that a CS degree
involves a lot of coding.

Tandon, as an engineering school, has these more practically inclined
professors. They can collaborate with the existing systems professors
and build up a more practical, well run CS program. The merged
department will also hopefully have more independence from
Courant. I'm no expert in NYU politics but I'd imagine that there
could be some way for the CS department to get funding from both
Tandon and CAS.

If we're talking big big ideas, I'd have NYU spin off a specific
institute for Computer Science and find some rich donor to underwrite
it. Perhaps the Jim Simons Institute of Computational Sciences? That
way NYU CS will finally be a first-class citizen. Yes, it will mean
NYU CS will lose the prestige of Courant, but the prestige of Courant
was never for its CS, it was for its math. By building a new
institute, NYU CS will be able to create its own reputation and its
own legacy.

I've done enough complaining about NYU CS. You all know my stance;
it's time that I advocated for a solution. Merging the departments
will not solve all of NYU CS' problems. But it's a start.
