---
title:  "The End"
date:   2021-12-22 11:14:36 -0700
---

[This is the end](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BXqPNlng6uI). I'm
gonna stop writing this blog. I've said this multiple times, to my
friends, to my readers, and to myself, but this time I'm truly
stopping.

Why? Simple. I'm graduating. And it's a pretty big waste of time and
energy to keep worrying about NYU CS after I've left. Contrary to what
this blog may imply, NYU is not my main priority or concern. I started
it because I was encountering NYU CS' shortcomings first hand, day in
and day out. That is no longer the case.

If you like my writing, please check out my other blog [Horribly
Underqualified](https://horriblyunderqualified.com/). It's less
negative (I hope).

I'd also like to add a disclaimer that all of these posts were written
at a particular time and a particular place. As time has passed, their
context may be lost. To quote one of my favorite films, In the Mood
for Love:

> That era has passed, nothing that belongs to it exists anymore. He
> remembers those vanished years, as though looking through a dusty
> window-pane, the past is something he could see but not touch. And
> everything he sees is blurred and indistinct.

If you read these posts and find them deeply inaccurate, please
remember that I was writing in that era, and that you are looking
through a dusty window-pane into the past.

If it still truly bothers you, go out and write your own posts! I'd
love for the people who write excellent rebuttals on reddit to start
their own blogs, to make their own cases. Reddit comments are great
but a blog will stand on its own.

I also hope that my angrier, more controversial posts don't overwhelm
the other posts. Just because I happen to not love NYU CS, doesn't
mean my advice on
[email](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/12/19/sent-from-my-iphone.html)
or [side
projects](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2019/12/21/side-projects.html) is
wrong.

I'd like to thank everybody who has read a post and agreed
or disagreed. I'd like to thank all the people I've bugged to read my
posts and give me feedback, even if they didn't give it. I'd like to
thank NYU CS, the faculty, the students, the administrators. Without
you, I wouldn't have anything to write about.

Thank you all!

**The End**
