---
title:  "One NYU CS"
date:   2020-08-30 20:00:00 -0700
---

I've been thinking about a single problem for a while now. It's
something that's bothered me for some time: Why Does NYU CS Suck?

I mean this in the nicest possible way. NYU CS sucks in two particular
dimensions. It doesn't suck in terms of faculty. Nor research. Not
even facilities. Courant isn't the nicest place but 60 Fifth Avenue is
pretty beautiful. NYU CS sucks in two ways: courses and community.

I've tried my damndest to fix the community. I've worked on NYU's
hackathon; I've build mentorship programs; I've maintained this blog.

But courses? I don't have any control over that. I've written before
about how NYU courses aren't sufficient. I've even written an entire
article on
[gaps](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/08/12/whats-missing.html) in
NYU's curriculum. Unfortunately I'm not sure what percentage of my
readership is faculty or administration. I suspect none.

And for the longest time I could not understand why NYU's courses are
so lackluster. I could not figure out why other schools seemed to have
classes on robotics, on distributed systems, on functional
programming, even classes on ethics.

After doing some research, I've finally figured out why.

> NYU CS has two CS departments

At every other school I've looked at, there is one single CS
department. Even if there is an engineering school and an Arts &
Sciences school. Even if there is a BA and a BS program. Every other
program consolidates their CS courses into one single department.

This makes sense. Why should we teach two sets of intro courses? Why
run completely different Data Structures courses? Why have entirely
different degrees?

Granted, most schools didn't buy their engineering school less than 10
years ago. But enough time has passed. Enough work has been
done.

Administrators, if you're listening, now is the time to merge the CS
departments.

> We need One NYU CS

Imagine a future where a class with a niche topic like Networking or
Compilers could be taught to both Tandon and CAS students. Electives
that wouldn't normally be feasible could succeed under this system.

Imagine a future where recruiting happened under one banner. We'd no
longer have Tandon recruiting and CAS recruiting, but just NYU CS
recruiting.

Why do I know this will work? We've already succeeded with merging the
math departments. I've seen first-hand how many students have
appreciated the increased breadth and depth of courses offered.

And by merging the departments, we can fix the community. For
instance, we can run honors CS courses. One of my favorite parts of
Courant is the honors math classes. By collecting many of talented
math majors in one place, we were able to form a community. As we met
other talented math majors, they got pulled into this
network.

Unfortunately we do not have that same network for CS. I suspect there
are quite a few brilliant CS majors who I have simply not met. We
don't have a place to find each other.

Merging the courses will in turn help merge the communities. The only
tech organization that I've found that spans both CAS and Tandon is
HackNYU. This is a shame. There should be no reason that our schools
are this fragmented socially.

Many CS clubs struggle to find experienced upperclassmen to mentor the
newer students. If we can create a more unified community, clubs will
be able to find more mentors and help more students.
