Too many people worry about problems that aren't really problems.

Specifically, they worry about problems that are good problems to
have. They're worrying about applying to internships because they also
want to do research and undergrad research programs have applications
that open much later than internships. They're worrying about how
they'll move to a different city if they get the job. They're worrying
about whether or not they're prepared for the interview before they
even apply.

These are all wonderful problems to have. If you end up having to
decide between an offer and a potential research position, that's a
great situation to be in. It's certainly a lot better than not
applying to internships, then not getting a research position and
having to spend your summer twiddling your thumbs.

And besides, it's not like these problems are imminent. You haven't
gotten the job yet. You haven't gotten the interview. Once you get
close, you can start worrying.

There's a common idea in algorithms that when you come to a choice,
you take both options. The most famous instance of this idea is in
non-deterministic Turing machines. Turing machines are basically an
extremely simple model of a computer. It has an unlimited tape of
memory which it can read from and navigate through. Based on the
current location of the tape, the machine can decide to do something.

Non-deterministic Turing machines are neat because they can decide to
do multiple things. In a sense, you can imagine the machine, at a
decision point, cloning itself into a bunch of other machines, each of
which go down a path. If one of the clones succeeds, then the machine
succeeds.

Anyways, I digress. My point is that it's good to have options. Too
often we see choices as either/or. You either stay at the same school
or you transfer. You choose the research position or the job. That may
be true in the end, but that doesn't mean you should cut off these
options early.

Another non-problem that I see some students talk about is working in
boring or unappealing areas. Sure, that can suck. But it's also a
problem that you can tackle once you're sitting in front of the job
offers. Besides, this might be the topic of an entirely different
post, but it's not a matter of *if* but *when* you will be saddled
with boring work. Better to have it be during an internship than
during a full-time job.

