---
title:  "Look Up"
date:   2020-10-21 20:00:00 -0700
---

Talk to a student about the big tech companies and you'll often get an
enthusiastic response. They study for hours, practicing technical
interview questions. They beg their friends and acquantances and
strangers for referrals. They frequent various forums and beg for
resume feedback.

This post isn't for them. If you're one of these people, good for
you. Try to survive recruiting season and not have your job be your
identity.

Instead I'd like to talk to the people on the other side of the
spectrum. The people who are happy to take the first job they see. The
people who don't see the purpose of going above $30/hr.

I'll preface this with saying that there's nothing wrong with being
satisfied with one's job. If you truly are happy with your current
position, then feel free to ignore my advice here.

That being said, I believe there's some real benefits to working at a
larger, more prestigious company, even if it's only for a short
period. These benefits aren't always readily apparent unless you know
people at large tech companies or you work there yourself.

# Pay

Pay is an interesting factor. If you were to ask potential
applications to large tech companies, most of them would probably cite
pay as a major motivator. And yeah, pay can make a big difference. We
all know what money can accomplish. However this is probably the least
convincing point. Everybody knows Facebook pays bank. If someone isn't
applying to Google, citing pay probably won't convince them.

Granted, the extent to which they pay a lot is often underrated. [Dan
Luu](https://danluu.com/startup-tradeoffs/) goes into this in detail,
but in short, it's a **lot** of cash. Especially if you can get
competing offers.

But again, it's unlikely that cash is the convincing factor.

# Coworkers

I'm hesitant to make any claim as to whether company size is
correlated to quality of employees. In fact I won't. There's plenty of
brilliant programmers at companies large and small.

However there's a matter of simple math. At a small company, there's
maybe 10-20 programmers. Realistically, how many programmers there are
going to be in the top percentile? Whereas with a company of 40,000
programmers? Definitely gonna be some top performers in that group.

With your day to day work, you might not notice this difference. A 5
person team is a 5 person team at Google or at your local dev
shop. But simply having access to these top performers can be
extremely valuable. At my big N job we had an internal tool to query
anybody, figure out their email and position in the hierarchy. I made
it a habit to look up various respected figures in my field of
interest and chat with them.

Say I wasn't satisfied with my team. I could have easily messaged one
of these top performers and looked into moving onto their team.

# Process

Large companies have well defined processes. This can be annoying, as
when I waited a week for my credentials to clear. It can also be
incredibly informative. A lot of these processes were put in place for
specific reasons.

At a small company, deploying may consist of talking to your coworker
next to you, or sshing into a box with root access. At a large company
you will have a thorough process that reviews your code and puts in
the necessary controls so that your code won't crash half the internet
or lose millions of dollars.

Likewise processes will be defined for more personal issues. If you
have problems with your manager, there's a process. If you want to
switch your team, there's a process. These processes will not always
be good. But they will exist.

Some people claim that they prefer smaller companies because there's
no process. That's not entirely true. Smaller companies don't have no
process as much as undefined processes. This can be tricky to
navigate, as it means you'll need to scope out the lay of the land
before attempting something. Or worse, your request will require your
manager to create a process, which they most likely will invent on the
spot. This will not go your way most of the time.

Working at a large company can teach you a lot about process. Even if
you end up leaving the company, this knowledge about process can be
super useful in your career.

# Resume

Big companies are more recognizable. Beyond pay, the resume boost of a
big company is probably the best return on investment. I spent three
months at a large company and it made my resume infinitely more
competitive.

It's a bit of [a
meme](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC4xKdmAXFh4ACyhpiQ_3qBw) at
this point, but stuff like "Ex-Google/ex-Facebook" do really carry
cachet.

Even if you go to a large company, hate it and leave within a year,
you'll forever have a resume boost and a bargaining chip.

Your work will also sound more impressive. I can say that I built a
data pipeline that processes petabytes of data. It wasn't that hard
honestly. I used a standard big data tool and wrote simple data
processing steps. But hey, it sounds cool.

# Do It Once

Again, for the angry mobs who think I'm blindly claiming big tech is
better: I'm not.

