---
title:  "Hit Retry"
date:   2020-06-17 20:00:00 -0700
---

I do this fun exercise where I contrast how I learn for fun versus how
I learn in school. One big difference is in having to take multiple
tries to learn something.

There have been quite a few topics where it took me a couple tries to
learn them properly. Monads took me a few iterations. I had to read
about them, use them, then read about them some more, and finally wrap[^1]
my head around them. Programming itself took a few tries! I tried to
learn C, then NetLogo, then some Objective-C, then a little
JavaScript/Python. Only in my high school's intro to programming class
did it finally stick. With Racket of all languages. Go figure.

[^1]: Like a burrito!

In school, retrying is hard. If you fail a course and have to take it
again, that's a huge negative. Why is that? In our education system we
happen to value forward movement; students cannot be "left
behind". Therefore only the students who blatantly do not know the
subject, who do not submit the work, who do not come close to passing
the test, only they will have to repeat the class. Everybody else gets
passed, albeit sometimes with a C or D.

When I think back on my courses, there's definitely some that I should
not have passed. I didn't know the material; I didn't properly grasp
the ideas; I didn't get it. But since repeating a class is a travesty,
I was allowed to pass. Sometimes with quite good grades!

Of course there's a financial aspect to this problem. Failing students
is directly correlated to them losing money. If not in more tuition,
then in delaying their entry to the workforce. There's a financial
aspect as well to the school. Students who have to repeat courses tend
to get discouraged and might drop out.

I don't have a solution to this problem. Some schools go ahead and
fail students. UChicago, Cornell, etc. are famous for their trial by
fire classes. Often times this is combined with a "dropdown major",
basically a major that one can switch to that is easier. These aren't
officially designated, but they're well known among students.

Maybe the answer is to keep things the same. There's nothing
necessarily wrong with students coming out of college not knowing
certain subjects. It's okay if some CS students don't understand
Operating Systems. It's fine if some math majors don't have a great
grasp of Galois theory.

But it does become a problem when students leave a degree without the
skills necessary to work as a programmer.
