Here's how to fix NYU CS.

1. Get the right people.

Find someone who can lead the charge. This person needs to be a
tenured faculty. Non-tenured faculty will not have the political power
to get stuff done. They should be a computer scientist through and
through. Not an applied mathematician. Ideally someone who touches
code, as they need to understand what it's like to program. Computer
science is not programming, but a significant portion of a computer
science degree entails programming.

They need to be somewhat young, as this process will take several
years.

They need to have strong opinions on how to teach and how to train CS
majors. They should have taught undergrad somewhat recently.

After that person, we'll need others. Ideally other tenured faculty
who can help this leader to reform the department. If not tenured
faculty, there should be at least a core group of teachers who can
develop standards and curricula for the leader.

Of course administrators will need to be on board with these
changes. That'll be harder, but hopefully with the help of tenured
faculty, it can be done.

2. Get more money.

Money causes a lot of NYU CS' problems. Courant needs cash, students
bring cash. Therefore Courant can't fail students.

Courant needs to figure out a way to get more money so they're less
beholden to student enrollment. One possible way: renegotiate
contracts with CAS to demand more money per student. Threaten to move
the entire CS department to Tandon if not.

Other options: go find rich donors who would be willing to christen a
department. The Simons Department of Computer Science has a nice ring
to it, eh? Or perhaps the Bezos Department.

3. Merge the CS departments

Having two CS departments means redundant courses. If we merge them,
we get to combine courses. This saves professors and money.

This will also mean the academic reputation of CAS will meet the
professional reputation of Tandon. The best of both worlds.

Yes, yes, there are political forces preventing the two from
merging. That's not an acceptable excuse.

4. Get undergraduate TAs.

Not allowing undergraduate TAs is a massive mistake. It prevents
students from playing an active role in shaping NYU's CS
education. Instead we have graduate TAs who often don't know the NYU
curriculum or are just plain incompetent.

Graduate TAs will likely have to stick around due to graduate students
needing to make a living. But there should be new spots for
undergraduate course assistants who can assist students, run office
hours and grade work. All that's necessary is extending the current
grader position to include other responsibilities and paying them
more.

More TAs will help make larger classes more manageable. Students will
have several resources for help.

5. Get better career services.

Courant CS doesn't seem to help students whatsoever in getting
jobs. Hire someone whose entire job is to help students get jobs. They
should have experience in recruiting and industry connections. Offer
free interview prep with NYU alumni.

Pay students to moderate the opportunities mailing list and remove all
of the insulting unpaid job offers.

6. [Fix professor allocation.](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2020/12/08/waitlisted-professor-allocation.html)

7. Recruit better students.

NYU needs to advertise Courant better. We have a world class research
institute and yet NYU doesn't advertise it. Courant should be as well
known as Tisch or Stern.

NYU should also seek out good high school CS majors. Any good high
school programmer should get message inviting them to an open house
about how amazing Courant is. We can lie through our teeth to get them
here. This should be someone's job.

NYU should certainly consider offering scholarships for CS majors. We
likely lose a lot of great CS majors to state schools.

Perhaps Courant could even create its own admissions process?

8. Increase the major's rigor.

Right now the CS major is a joke. It's hilariously low on requirements
and the ones it has are watered down, weak courses.

Make the courses rigorous. They should be on par with Cornell,
UChicago, MIT, etc. People should be surprised at the level of
training coming out of NYU CS.

Offer a co-op program. Co-ops give students actual programming chops,
help them make money and prepare them for their career.

For students who join the major late, offer an intensive course. The
course should meet every day. Would a French department let a
prospective major who has never spoken a word of French go at the
normal pace? No. Why should that be true of CS?

Fail more students. CS is a hard major.

Provide honors courses. I know, students didn't take them before. The
solution? Recruit students to honors courses. Dangle benefits like job
referrals, honors degree and maybe even a class trip (to Silicon
Valley?). If that doesn't work, make any student who gets an A in two
CS classes take Honors.

9. Work on hiring

This is easier said than done, but Courant needs more CS
faculty. Specifically, Courant needs professors who do serious,
engineering/implementation driven CS research. This style of research
is directly in contrast to the very theoretical, very
non-implementation driven, close to applied mathematics research that
the department currently focuses on.

Why do we need professors in this vein? We need professors who touch
code and have a vested interest in keeping up to date with
technology. They will be more effective teachers and will connect
better with students. Too many of my professors were surprisingly
incompetent programmers. Not every CS professor should be a competent
programmer, but there should be a contingent within the department who
are competent programmers.

We also need younger professors who are interested in teaching. Older
professors definitely come from a different generation with different
expectations of teaching. It's a relatively recent phenomenon that
professors were even judged by their teaching ability and not purely
as researchers.

Beyond tenured faculty, we need more adjuncts who work in industry and
are aware of new developments. People such as [Edward
Yang](http://ezyang.com/) and Alex Alekseyev are far more effective
teachers than the majority of the tenured faculty.

10. Change the philosophy

With all that said, this list is meaningless unless we can change the
philosophy of Courant CS. I've talked about many of these ideas to
people in the CS department. The resounding response can be summed up
as "we can't". This incapability is hidden behind various excuses,
behind bureaucracy and bullshit, but fundamentally it's an
incapability of will. The leaders of Courant CS are not willing to put
in the work, to risk political capital, to take the time to make the
program truly good.

To put it bluntly, if Courant CS is to become good, it must want to
be good.
