While talking to a friend about interview prep, I had a realization
about how I go through interviews. Specifically, I try to figure out
the archetype of my interviewer and tailor my interview to that
archetype.

What do I mean by archetype? I'll illustrate by way of a character,
say, Morgan. Morgan doesn't do side projects. They go to work, where
they are a senior developer. They keep up to date on technology, but
they don't actively seek out the cutting edge. They care about best
practices, however they recognize that shipping is the ultimate
goal. They emphasize work life balance and don't work outside of
normal hours barring extreme cases.

I'd categorize Morgan as a **pragmatist** archetype. They clearly care
about programming, but they're not hyper passionate. They're likely a
little older, possibly with children. They likely espouse concepts
like "the right tool for the right job" or "code is meant to be read,
not written".

Keep in mind I'm not making any value judgements about this
archetype. It may sound like I'm being derogatory, but unfortunately
that's a side effect of creating these archetypical or rather
stereotypical portraits. I'd love to work with any of these
people.

If I'm talking to someone like Morgan in an interview, I'm not going
to wax lyrical about my love of Rust. Likely if I were to do so,
they'd see me as a naive, overly language obsessed novice[^1]. Instead
I'd probably talk to Morgan about the importance of writing good code
and how tooling can facilitate stable, scalable services.

[^1]: Which, yeah, probably guilty

However, let's take another archetype, Jaime. Jaime loves to spend
their time reading tech blogs and following the latest news. They
started out writing Ruby, then got really into Go, then Rust and have
written some significant libraries for all of them.

Jaime loves to write code, sometimes to their detriment. They're not
as involved in the business, corporate end, but really have a deep
knowledge of the tech. They care about stuff like performance, and
idiomatic code and can tell you when you're doing something
potentially hazardous.

As an archetype, Jaime is an *adventurer*. They love being the early
adopters of new technology and are willing to delve into unknown
territory to get there. They likely are younger, as they have the time
to teach themselves. If I were talking to Jaime, I'd go out on my Rust
knowledge and the cool stuff in the ecosystem. I'd talk about stuff
like WebAssembly or dependent types or Haskell. It doesn't matter if
any of this is related to the job. It's more about communicating that
we're on the same wavelength.

Within these archetypes is really several qualities that go on a
spectrum. Stuff like "valuation of work life balance", "interest in
new technology", age, etc. In my experience, they're correlated enough
that you can use these archetypes.

I realize this may seem cynical. I'm showing selective sides of myself
to get hired. I'd counter that we do that every day. Geez, read some
Goffman. Also, it's not as disingenuous as it may seem. I'm a firm
believer that programmers have a responsibility to read the room and
tailor their programming styles to their company/team. If you work
with a bunch of pragmatists, maybe don't try to get them to use Rust
all the time. If you work with some adventurers, you'll probably have
to learn some new tech. Of course you can have influence over your
coworkers as well. People learn from each other and having both a
pragmatist and an adventurer on a team can lead to even better
results.

The pragmatist and the adventurer are the main archetypes that come to
mind. I'm curious if there are others. Of course there are nuances to
these archetypes like ability, experience and degree. But are there
other archetypes that you've encountered? If so, feel free to reach
out and let me know.
