NYU CS needs to adopt a policy of tough love. Tough love means
difficult, yet rewarding classes; more comprehensive requirements;
realistic assessments of students' progress. It means that the school
should not stoop to the students' inability but force them to rise to
the occasion.

Currently NYU CS's policy is less tough love and more weak apathy. The
major requirements are insultingly low; the courses, barring some
notable exceptions, are dumbed down; the department insists on
promising students who start the major exceedingly late the
possibility of graduating on time.

This policy makes sense in the context of Courant's history. Courant
was effectively an attempt to carve out a top notch research institute
inside a commuter university. The singular priority of the Courant was
its research output. Undergraduates and their education were not
prioritized in the slightest.

A lot has changed since then. Primarily, NYU has become a far better
school. NYU has become a school with a reputation not far off from the
Ivy League. Students are engaged, hard workers who are proud to attend
NYU. I may have criticized the CS student body in the past, but even I
must acknowledge that student quality is trending upwards.

Yet NYU continues to treat its CS students with weak apathy. The
[requirements for CAS
CS](https://cs.nyu.edu/home/undergrad/major_programs.html) are less
rigorous than [Arizona State's
requirements](https://webapp4.asu.edu/programs/t5/roadmaps/ASU00/ESCSEBS/null/ALL/2021)[^1]. The
courses are exceedingly over simplified. If they are not over
simplified, they are curved to ensure that students are passed
through.

[^1]: Arizona State seems like a great university, but I think we can
    safely say that NYU should be at least equivalent to it.

This behavior is not becoming of a top notch research university. NYU
may be ranked in the top 20 for CS programs, but I'd estimate that its
undergraduate education is less demanding, less rigorous and less
comprehensive than the top 100 CS schools.

I've already discussed how courses are extremely inconsistent. If we
could standardize them to a single, high bar, then we could get a
semblance of rigor into the curriculum.

What's complicated about this stance is that students generally don't
like tough love. It's a rare, masochistic student who demands for
courses to be harder. I'd posit that it's impossible for a professor
to teach a course where there isn't at least one student who complains
about the difficulty.

Why is that? If the courses are not hard, why do students complain?
This is a question that has haunted professors for eons, but I'd give
a few possibilities:

1. The student doesn't like the subject in the first place.

I've noted this before. If you or someone else always seems to have
the wrong professor, if you always have a dumb TA who can't grade
correctly, if you always think the course is just too
boring/intense/time-consuming, you just might not like CS. If so, I'm
sorry, but I don't think NYU should design a CS major for people who
don't like CS.

2. Students like complaining.

I get it. Complaining's fun! Why do we like watching Curb Your
Enthusiasm? Why do we enjoy Twitter? Why is gossiping so fun? We all
love that feeling of indignance and the ensuing catharsis of
complaining. It's like how it's impossible to be the mayor of New York
and have people like you.

3. Learning always requires suffering

Learning is an inherently painful process. You're stretching the
limits of your mind and therefore dealing with uncertainty, inability,
lack of control, all things that people tend to not like.

Of course learning can be a lot of fun! But in the same way that
running can be a lot of fun. Just because some enjoy it doesn't mean
that a 2 mile jog would be popular.

4. The course is genuinely too hard for some people.

Alas, we must acknowledge this possibility. Everybody is not created
equal and there are certainly people who struggle with the current
curriculum, let alone a more rigorous version. And while I'm
sympathetic, the truth is that if you go to a prestigious university,
there is always the chance that you won't be able to keep up with the
work. It's not the school's responsibility to make the curriculum
easier in that case. It's your responsibility to either figure out
ways to handle it, or to find something else to study.

That said, I truly believe that if the curriculum were to get harder,
many students would rise to the occasion. Perhaps they would need more
tutoring and help. Perhaps they'd get lower grades or repeat
courses. But they'd get through the curriculum.

Some may ask, what's the harm of an easier curriculum? The more
passionate students can simply take more courses. First, if there were
more courses, I'd agree with you. Unfortunately unless a course is
required to graduate, it's rather unlikely a student will take
it. There are some courses like compilers, programming languages,
discrete structures, etc. that would probably not survive as
electives.

Second, I think there's value in pushing students to their limits. I
know that it took some difficult math courses for me to realize that
no, I don't really want to pursue this further. If I had stuck with
easier math courses, or if I had waited until senior year to take
these difficult courses, then I might not have had the realization.

It's often said that CS courses don't match up to actual work as a
programmer. I understand that point of view, however I disagree. CS
courses teach you a lot of the necessary skills in debugging, problem
solving, and abstraction that you'll need on a daily
basis. Furthermore if NYU provided more advanced, focussed courses,
they would definitely help students get jobs by [cultivating
niches](https://blog.torchnyu.com/2021/03/18/the-value-of-niches.html).
