Let's set the scene. You're a recent graduate in CS or another STEM
field. You've never had a CS job before. You don't have any really
good famly contacts. How do you get a job as a programmer?

Well if you've read this blog before, you should know the
answer. Network, apply to jobs, make side projects, etc. However, I
don't think I've accurately expressed the scale to which you should do
this. When I've given advice to first time job applicants, they seem
to apply to very few places and put all of their expectations into
those few applications. That's the wrong way to approach job
applications.

I'd say that you should aim to apply to 3-4 jobs a day. These can be
multiple openings in the same company, these can be jobs that you
aren't qualified for, these can be jobs in different cities, but as
long as it is paid and programming, you should apply. If you do the
math, 3-4 jobs a day, assuming 5 days a week and 50 week out of the
year gets you to 875 applications. That should seem absurd. That is
absurd. However, hopefully you won't reach 875, as you'll have
received an offer by then.

That said, you should not stop applying just because you got an
offer. I see that a lot too. Just because a company wants to hire you,
that does not mean you necessarily want to be hired by them. Let's
face it. If you're a college graduate with zero experience, you're not
exactly a catch. There are many great companies that understand this
and are willing to put in the work to train you. There are a bunch
more companies that do not understand this and simply want cheap
labor. They'll use tactics like [exploding
offers](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2008/11/26/exploding-offer-season/)
and before you know it, you'll be desperately filing tickets on a
sinking ship. That isn't the worst, as long as you're getting paid and
getting programming experience, but it's not the best.

Why do people not apply to jobs? There's a few clear candidates: it's
boring; rejection sucks; and they lack confidence. Boredom, I'm sorry
to say, has no solution. Put on some music and fill out the damn
form. Sorry, but it's not that hard. At least you don't have to fill
it out for your 3 decades of experience.

Fear of rejection is valid. Rejection sucks, especially if you've
already been through a lot of it. 
