I've realized something about myself. I'm deeply arrogant[^1]. It's why I
write this blog; I love the sound of my voice, written or not.

[^1]: This is so getting memed isn't it.

I've also come to realize that this arrogance is a very useful
trait. Because of it, I negotiate my pay; I don't stick with bad work
environments; I don't let people waste my time. My prevailing attitude
towards work is that my time is valuable, my energy is valuable and
you better be compensating me sufficiently in return for expending it.

Other people don't seem to see it that way. I get it. As students we
can't afford to be arrogant. We have to do our homework, get good
grades, listen to authority figures. Well we don't *have* to, but most
people do follow the rules.

But then, suddenly, something changes. You get your first job and
boom, no homework. If your boss asks you to finish something after
work, you can tell them, no, you won't do it. You want to use a sick
day to watch Netflix and sleep in? Why not. You want more money? Ask
for it. Hate your job? Leave it.

All of a sudden, you have power. The only problem is, you have to take
it. If you don't, you won't have it. If your boss gives you homework,
it's up to you to push back, to refuse to do the work.

And sure, it can backfire. Your boss does have more power over you
than you do over them. But you don't have zero power. For one, it's a
pain in the ass to hire people. Firing you means they're down one
worker and have to spend a whole bunch of time and money on
hiring. Second, reprimanding you won't get any more work done. A boss
isn't measured according to how many punishments they dole out.

What's even better is that you get more power as your career
progresses. I used to approach job searches like a Dickensian orphan,
pleading "please sir, give me a job". Now I demand from
companies. What do they provide me? What can they pay me? Why should I
work for them?

It also means that if a company treats me poorly, I leave. I had an
interview with a startup in my area of interest. It seemed like a good
fit for both of us. We scheduled a few hours long interview. That went
well, and they scheduled a follow-up. Seems like a lot, but I was
willing to hear them through. After that interview, which was
grueling, confusing and pretty terrible, they asked for a third
interview. Sophomore year me would have taken that third interview
instantly. This time around, I ended the process.

In retrospect, I should have ended it even earlier. When you're
interviewing at a company, the question in your head shouldn't just be
"will they hire me?" It should be "do they treat me with respect? Do
they waste my time? Do I like them?"

This dynamic has also shifted over the years. If you asked someone in
my parent's generation, they'd tell you that every job has the right
to demand you show up at 9, stay until 5, and that the perks would be
coffee and dental[^2]. Now, at least in the tech industry, I would see
a strict 9-5 as a red flag. Why does the company need to demand the
precise hours in which I do my work?

[^2]: Granted dental is a great perk

I've also noticed that one way companies attempt to keep this control
is by appealing to professionalism. You can't show up at 11, *that's
unprofessional*. You can't refuse to do work after hours, *that's
unprofessional*. You can't leave a job after 6 months, *that's
unprofessional*. I actually do believe in professionalism. I think
it's good to get your work done, communicate properly, and be polite
to everybody. But professionalism is not obedience. It is not
following the rules your company lays out for you.

Why then do people follow these arbitrary rules? A lot of them are
afraid of getting fired or reprimanded. I'm sympathetic; nobody wants
to be fired. But again, there's some realities. You're not going to
get fired for a few minor infractions. If you are, that company is a
sinking ship and you just got handed a gift. People also obey because
they don't want to admit that their job sucks and that they have to
find a new one. I also get that; job hunting sucks. Except...it
probably doesn't suck as much as you remember. That arduous,
Dickensian-orphan process you went through the first time? Not even a
tenth as bad the second time around. You have experience. You have
stuff you can talk about on your resume. You probably code a lot
better.
